---
layout: post
title: "Designing Data-Intense Applications: Part 1"
tags: [books-ddia]
---

TODO: first paragraph is shown in the preview
{:.red}

# What is data-intense application?

The first question one might ask is exactly this - what is a data-intense application?
What other types of applications are there, and how data-intense applications differ from them?
 
No explicit definition is given, but the differentiating factor is pretty clear - data-intense applications 
are the opposite of compute-intense applications. In data-intense applications major factors are complexity, 
size, or rate of change in data, whereas compute-intense is more about efficiently crunching numbers that originate
from relatively small amount of input data.

**Opinion:** data-intense and compute-intense are not mutually exclusive, but more like two ends of 
a continuous spectrum: there are clearly cpu-bound applications - like computing pi number or prime numbers
(e.g. [prime95][p95]); data-bound applications (virtually any Spark/Hadoop application); but there are also 
all kinds of mixes of the two, with algorithmic problems sitting closer to the _compute_ side, and your 
ordinary line-of-business applications closer to the _data_ side. And [CERN computing][cern] right in the middle.
{:.message}

[p95]: https://www.mersenne.org/download/
[cern]: https://home.cern/science/computing

Basically this means that most of the applications currently out there are data-intense.

# Chapter 1: Reliable, Scalable, and Maintainable applications

Chapter 1 is devoted to a few non-functional aspects that are vital to long-term success of any software system.

<dl>
    <dt>Reliability</dt>
    <dd>
        The ability of the application/system to "do the right thing" - perform its' function with acceptable 
        performance and necessary data protection/access control - even in the face of adversity, such as 
        software errors, hardware faults, human mistakes or outright malicious interference
    </dd>
    <dt>Scalability</dt>
    <dd>
        System's ability to react to load - as simple as that
    </dd>
    <dt>Maintainability</dt>
    <dd>
        An umbrella term covering multiple aspects of running and maintaining the system - from making it easy to
        run/deploy/monitor/etc. to tech debt amounts, complexity and ability to change and evolve with time
    </dd>
</dl>

Some techniques, practices and approaches to achieve these aspects are briefly discussed. Most of the chapter is 
devoted to describing the load (using an example of Twitter timelines) and performance.
 
# Chapter 2: Data models and Query Languages

# Chapter 3: Storage and Retrieval

# Chapter 4: Encoding and Evolution
